---
layout: story
---
For fourteen thousand years their embryos had been frozen in a vault five miles beneath the surface of the earth. The need had arisen, as it frequently does, for intelligent organisms suited to the task of exploration, and their embryos had been transferred to artificial wombs and allowed to gestate for between two hundred seventy-four and two hundred eight-two days, as conditions warranted. They were removed from the wombs, exposed to artificial light, cared for by a small team of adult humans, and educated by an artificial intelligence system named Mother. The vault spanned no more than five hundred square meters, including the cooling, food production, and water and waste recycling systems; the half dozen adults and dozen children who could survive within its confines were all the people they would ever know in their lives; and they were the lucky ones, the ones destined to climb up and see the sky. They would perish, of course, but due to the constraints of the vault, senescence was a luxury afforded to no one anyway.

Teg led the way up the stairwell, her head lamp illuminating the steps before them, followed by Gog, who carried the oxygen tanks and the tent poles and the cooking supplies, and, furthest behind with the heaviest load, Pog, who hauled ten gallons of water upon his back. They had hiked the stairs many times in the past, building up their stamina, many times especially in the past few months to pre-position supplies, but they had never ascended closer than a quarter miler to the top. The route would take them five days to each the surface. Once, thousands of years in the past, elevators had run the entire route from the vault to the surface. Now only an eerie tone produced by subtle air currents was the only occupant of the shafts.

They camped on the stairwell landings, naked except for briefs because of the humid heat that was unavoidable at such depths. Their thighs and calves ached from eighteen straight hours of climbing. Not needing them, they had switched off their lamps, and the darkness that surrounded them was absolute. To assuage their thirst, they licked moisture directly from where it condensed upon the floor. It was so quiet that the patter of beetles and cockroaches nibbling the fungus that infested the walls was audible. The sounds were clear enough that they could stretch their fingers straight out to the walls, as dexterously as if they had been guided by sight, and snatch the insects and pop them into their mouths. They were the last bites of fresh food they might ever have.

